#2024-08-24

I'm working to better understand the context in which R. grew up, because I find it fascinating that Colon Classification -- a pure faceted system -- arose from someone near the top of a traditionally hierarchical social milleiu. One might expect someone coming from this background to design a system reinforcing rather than dissipating the hierarchical structure of knowledge. 

Trautmann (2011) provides some helpful clarification for Westerners: What we typically call _caste_ is more properly _varna_. The Vedic tradition (the classical system of Hindu knowledge and philosophy) divides people into four _varnas_, which specify an individual's _dharma_. The _Rig Veda_ (c. 1500-1000 bce) includes a creation story in which "the primordial being, Purusha (man or spirit), often also called Prajapti, lord of creatures, or Brahma" completes a complex act of self-sacrifice, in which 

> ...parts of his dismembered body became the things of the phenomenal universe (animals, plants, the division of time, and so forth) including human society in its four parts: From his mouth can the brahmin, who is associated with the sacred utterance of the Veda; from his arms, the kshatriya or warrior; from his thighs, the vaishya farmer and tradesman; and from his feed the shudra or servant. (96)

Parallel to this esoteric system, we have the boots-on-the-ground system of _jatis_ which are more akin to clans in the Western context: Extended family groups typically located in a specific region and associated with a particular occupation. Also similar to the western tradition, complex social norms formed over time governing inter-jati marriages and economic relations. And finally, we have the _castes_ proper, which "number in the thousands and they are generally limited in their extent to a single region of India." Caste provided yet another layer of social and economic norms, which often entrapped lower-caste individuals in disadvantageous circumstances. Caste discrimination was officially outlawed with "[the constitutions adopted by India in 1949 and by Pakistan in 1953](https://www.britannica.com/topic/Dalit)", but caste remains a relevant social grouping. Legal repairative frameworks (similar to Affirmative Action) are in place for what are legally called the "scheduled classes," and in India's democracy, castes often function as political interest groups whose influence local politicians must be cognizant of.

